# 3. Use Playwright for end-to-end tests

Date: 2023-05-26

## Status

Accepted

## Context

We have a suite of integration tests in this repository that use
[Cypress](https://www.cypress.io/) to test the application locally against a
mock API. We'd like to be able to test the application as a whole with a real
backend to ensure everything is working as expected on a deployed environment.

Although in [the ADR where we documented our decision to use
Pact](./0002-use-pact-for-contract-testing.md) we decided we'd use contract
tests instead of end-to-end (E2E) tests to cover some of this functionality,
contract tests don't quite cover everything we might want to test, so, for the
sake of confidence, we would like to keep using a suite of E2E tests somewhere.

Other teams, particularly the Approved Premises team, initially trialled
running Cypress against a deployed environment but have moved away from this
due to slowness, flakiness and conflicting Typescript settings between their
main codebase and the code used to write the E2E tests.

## Decision

As the Approved Premises team [have
done](https://github.com/ministryofjustice/hmpps-approved-premises-ui/blob/main/doc/architecture/decisions/0010-use-playwright-for-end-to-end-tests.md),
we're going to trial using a suite of E2E tests in a different repo using
[Playwright](https://playwright.dev/). This is a more lightweight alternative
to Cypress, which is in use in other parts of HMPPS (See
<https://github.com/ministryofjustice/hmpps-probation-integration-e2e-tests>).

These tests will be run in the `end_to_end_test` CircleCI pipeline on the
development environment, after the environment has deployed, both on the UI and
API codebases.

We will deliberately keep the tests focused, as more of a smoke test to ensure
the application runs as expected, rather than reusing integration test code
which is more robust and has a lot of expectations.

We will keep an eye on these tests and how they go, because there is a balance
between us having a consistently passing test suite (which may suggest our
happy path is too "happy") and a test suite that breaks a lot, but for
legitimate reasons (i.e. a change in the UI or API that breaks functionality).

## Consequences

This will mean we're maintaining two test suites, one for integration and one
for E2E tests, however:

- The E2E tests will be kept deliberately simplistic, only testing the "happy
  path", with minimal expectations
- We will be able to use the VSCode [Playwright Test
  extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-playwright.playwright),
  which will allow us to "record" any new/changed tests - meaning we can
  rapidly generate / iterate E2E tests
